CMN529_ASSN1
UIN: 67203477


As new communication technologies surfaced, however, several “medium” theorists (or media ecologists) brought attention to the number of questions going unnoticed by viewing media as a passive channel of communication (e.g., Innis, 1951; McLuhan, 1964; Meyrowitz, 1986). The shift of focus from content characteristics of a message to characteristics of the medium itself increased the ability for researchers to study features of technology that shape social behavior, as well as culture and society. Media ecologists resolved that certain intrinsic logics of each medium (e.g., telegraph, television) are key to societal change based on the nature of its technological features (e.g., McLuhan, 1964; Meyrowitz, 1986).
This shift toward technological determinism, however, does no service to communication researchers in clarifying the boundaries of the concept we wish to express. Instead, this revelation led effects researchers to create new questions outside the concepts original context by defining media as a category of objects with features capable for social and psychological impact (Sundar, 2009). In other words, we know that a television is a medium because most of us agree that it is one, and because it represents a list of features that meet the (ambiguous) criteria for a medium. More precisely, Strömbeck (2008) defines media as newspapers, radio, and television; Hjarvard (2008) defines media as newspapers, radio, television, and interactive media; and Schultz (2004) has a similar list, but replaces interactive media with digital media. Even the very few scholars who attempt to conceptually define medium, do so by summarizing what might compose the definitional lists. For instance, Altheide (1994) define medium as “Any social or technological procedure or device that is used for the selection, transmission, and reception of information.” Defining the term medium by lists was convenient because it permitted additional inductive inference, which made it possible to predict the future based on the past (within the limits of induction). However, a major issue with this procedure is that it cannot easily accommodate new evidence or objects that emerge (Chaffee, 1991). For example, if I ask you, “What category do the following objects belong to? Cat, dog, rabbit.” You respond, “The category is pets.” However, if I add “racoon” to this list, the category changes to animal. From this, we can see that a concept defined by a definitional list is limited in its ability to apply to ad hoc members of the list (Murphy & Medin, 1985). Likewise, definitional lists of objects only allow us to modify the concept by expanding the definition, thereby incrementally obsolescing its utility in research. For instance, Morris and Ogan (1996) point out that (at the time of their publication) media effects researchers had largely ignored the research potential of the Internet because of the way communication media has been traditionally conceptualized. Likewise, the advent of new technologies further obsolesces the utility of this conceptualization because media may be embedded in and enable one another (e.g., smartphone, internet; Walther, 2010). This said, although defining a concept by its categorical exemplars may have helped the field conceptualize and clarify examples of media and instances of its use, the inability for exemplars to capture our knowledge of the relations among properties of dynamic technologies that represent a medium limit its power as an explanatory framework for future extensions and innovations in technology.
