CMN529_ASSN1
UIN: 67280337


Mediatization theory suggests that media shapes all processes of society in which communication takes place. Rather than focusing on individual effects, the authors build a framework for mediatization theory that identifies the impacts of technology at a macro level. The benefits of this conceptualization is that by understanding the way media, more generally, shapes society, we are able to build a knowledge that will outlive the phenomenal characteristics of a particular device. By focusing on processes, rather than characteristics, we are able to understand media and technology in a way that transcends time and cultures. Another striking aspect of the theory is the way that it complements already existing theories, namely mediation theory. Whereas mediation refers to media that mediate, and therefore impact, individuals; mediatization refers to the first derivative of mediation, in other words, the way that mediation impacts social institutions. For example, my professors often tell students that they may not use computers to take notes, as research suggests that taking notes on a computer leads to worse learning than taking notes by hand. Mediation and mediatization theory might explain this finding in two different (yet equally valid) ways.  Mediation theory might conclude that the reason students do not retain information as well on computers because cues emanating from a computer (e.g., keyboard) might lead students to use a mode of note-taking (e.g., scribing professor words) that lead to less learning and retention of information compared to using pen and paper. On the other hand, mediatization theory might note that the reason the computer cues are perceived in such a way is because the way that professors have learned to lecture is conducive to a pen and paper style of note-taking (e.g., speaking slowly, using pictures in slides that can’t be replicated in word doc). Nevertheless, as computer continue to become a ubiquitous part of daily life, we might see some of these social institutions change to accommodate the medium. Therefore, this distinction is important to understand processes at both a micro and macro level of analysis.
