CMN529_ASSN1
UIN: 67221634


Hjarvard (2004) defines mediatization as a process through which core elements of a social or cultural activity become dependent on some media and their logic. A core feature of mediatization is its emphasis on the ways in which culture and society are permeated by the media, to the extent that the media may no longer be conceivable as being separate from the institution. To discuss whether there is a meaningful sense in which de-mediatization may occur, I will first discuss a few examples of what I see as mediatization.


Example 1: In a single human life, we acquire an immeasurable amount of information. Because early hominids could only rely on grunts and nudges to communicate, there was no way to store and accumulate knowledge across generations. According to some scholars (e.g., Pinker & Bloom, 1992), symbolic communication developed so that early humans could access the vast reservoir of knowledge accumulated by a previous life, and avoid errors committed by their ancestors by building upon the aggregated knowledge of those before them. In the development of this  interdependent society, a system was created between a “language of thought” induced by nature and an external language induced by culture (Pinker & Bloom, 1992). It can be said that what started as a miniscule change in nature shaped a relatively modern culture incited by beliefs and desires. Accordingly, a new set of understandings and praxis was created to account for the kinds of content we consider worthy of communicating to one another. 


Example 2: Similarly, Marshall McLuhan (1967) argued that societies have always been shaped more by the nature of the media by which human communicate than by the content of the communication. McLuhan uses the alphabet as an example. He compares the unconscious manner of learning the alphabet to osmosis, suggesting that communication has become something of a biologically adaptive process. He goes on to claim that the meaning of words, which is culturally induced, predisposes the child to think and act automatically in certain ways.

Example 3: Modern communication technologies that rely on the processing power of computers may challenge conventional notions of media and its use (Kock, 2005). While Pinker & Boom (1992) suggest that our language of thought shaped our understandings of the content we consider worthy of communicating, computer-based technology flips this notion upside down. In other words, while language afforded means for expressing desires and beliefs, it demanded that people choose what they considered worthy of communicating. On the other hand, computer-based technology afford different action possibilities which allows for mass communication, and  instead make it more critical for the user to consider which thoughts and beliefs are worthy of listening to.


Based on the definition of mediatization delineated previously, all three of these examples might be considered instances of mediatization by which culture or society become permeated by media to the extent that it may no longer be conceivable to separate the two. For instance, many might agree that most institutions cannot be separated from speaking and the alphabet. Some might argue that these institutions are inconceivable without computer-based technology. The more challenging question is to say whether de-mediatization has occurred. Based on our definition of mediatization, many might argue that the changes to the nature of thought in the digital age might be evidence for de-mediatization of the former media logic (during symbolic communication). However, because a core feature of mediatization theory is its consideration of society and culture rather than the medium itself, I think that to evaluate de-mediatization on the basis of frequency or pervasiveness of the medium’s impact is counter-intuitive to the mediatization approach. Although there may have been changes to these institutions, the mediatization processes of some previous time are interwoven into the fabrics of the current societies in ways that cannot be separated. In simple words, no, I do not think there is a meaningful place for de-mediatization. I would probably just call it more mediatization.

Issue 2: Is there any meaningful sense in which media functions (such as news reporting) have been mediatized?


Yes, and I think this can be explained through considering normative functions of the press. Normative theories of journalism concern ideal functions of the press, what the press should do. A Normative theory describes an ideal way for a media system to be controlled and operated by the government, authority, leader and public. Normative system are generally understood and shaped by the social architecture of the institution in society. For example, reporters during the era of newspaper and television reporting abided by repetitive conventions or “rituals” to avoid public criticism and ridicule. This said, reporters were free to exercise personal action to the extent that the narrative abides to standard ideas, values, and practices built into the work of the news organization (Schudson, 1983). Furthermore, during this time, even individuals who entered the public sphere (e.g., opinion columns, book publishing) were expected to uphold a certain standard based on the social architecture. Accordingly Habermas proposed that citizens could enter the public sphere as long as they follow a certain social expectation: 1) Personal negation: When you go into public space, you deny your personal existence (i.e., I don’t go into space as a person, but as a citizen among other citizens) and 2) Universal supervision: Because it’s public, you have to act as if everyone is watching. Because the news institution was largely in control of information dissemination, this was a reasonable expectation to be able to uphold. However, new technology introduced a major shift by requiring no variant cost to enter the public sphere. The flattening out of this hierarchy has many implications for our social architecture and its values. It marks a major shift in the dominant functions of news reporting, and the shift of objectivity as a norm to transparency in journal writing. People expect information, and they expect all of it. As mentioned previously, whereas language and the alphabet afforded means for expressing desires and beliefs to the mass, it demanded that reports choose what they considered worthy of communicating. On the other hand, computer-based technology afford different action possibilities which allows for mass communication, and  instead make it more critical for the user to consider which thoughts and beliefs are worthy of listening to. This completely undermines Habermas’ social expectation of personal negation. This also brings into question the future of our social architecture. Because of the nature of this new system, people are inundated with all sorts of opinions from all angles. Perhaps the social architecture needs to change to allow for someone to win by being right, and other standards that would denote the shift in functions of the press.
