CMN529_ASSN1
UIN: 67775534


Marvin (1988) pays special attention to the outcome (psychological effect) of features of communication technology on the individual. According to the author, there is a flawed assumption that film and broadcasting, and subsequently, the development of large audiences, marks the beginning of communication (p. 3). Instead, the author argues that communicative possibilities, and theories formed from these possibilities, began with the invention of the telegraph. The distinction, however, is not intended to emphasize the object/instrument, but to point out apparent consequences of the “instrument-centered perspective.” Namely, by focusing on the communication process unique to the communication process relevant to television (mass media), researchers neglected the extent to which the field of communication technology is shaped by progress, change, and innovation. Here, the focus of communication is shifted from changes to the instrument to changes to the individual. In other words, the focus is not on the effect of technology on the audience, but rather the effect of features of technology on the individual, and the effect of this effect on society. 


Meyrowitz’ (1985) conceptual definition of media emphasizes the technological characteristics of the medium in order to shift the focus from the content of the media to the characteristics of the medium itself. In this sense, the author pays special attention to the impact of the technology itself on social behavior. The benefits of shifting the focus to consider characteristics of the medium is that it increases the ability for researchers to study the features of new technology that reshape the way individuals use technology. As new technology becomes more interactive, focus on the medium will be an important one.


Sproull & Kiesler (1991) discuss two levels of effects. The first level focuses on effects of technology on efficiency and productivity gains from reducing the cost of work that was previously more expensive (this is the outcome variable at the first level). In other words, this level of effects centers on how technology helps people do old things more efficiently. The second level focuses on on effects of technology on new processes. In other words, this level of effects centers on how technology allows for new possibilities, and therefore, influence people in an unforeseen way. This said, the authors’ interpretation of effects is instrument-centered such that the focus is on how a particular technology impacted behavior and society as people understood it.


Hampton & Wellman (2001) consider the effect of communication technology on the “totality of relationships in community ties” rather than paying particular focus to the medium. In this sense, the authors rely on a more traditional understand of the communication process by treating technology as a conduit through which information is sent and received. In sum, the author examines the effect of technological environments (for lack of a better word) on social contact.


Response 2
Synthesize a view of consequence from medium theory based on past readings.
Medium theory allows us to take note of patterns of consequences that are typical of large scale adoption of a new medium that fundamentally alter the way humans perceive and understand themselves and the world around them. A notable feature of medium theory is its emphasis on the technological characteristics of the medium (object) itself, rather than the content disseminated through the medium. The benefits of shifting the focus to consider characteristics of the medium is that it increases the ability for researchers to study the features of new technology that reshape the way individuals use technology. As new technology becomes more interactive, focus on the medium will be an important one. However, the issue I have with this theory is that it points out the consequences of only examining the phenomenal characteristics of the content on the device, and adjusts by examining the phenomenal characteristics of the device itself. With the remarkable growth of interactive media in recent history, it is becoming increasingly difficult for researchers and users to keep up with the changing nature of user interactions with media. As a result, communication scholars are beginning to recognize the issue with generating typologies with little attempt to integrate them at a broader level; and therefore, efforts are being made to develop newer approaches that focus on the functionality of digital technologies that can be observed in key features that exist across new and old technologies. Still, the statement made by medium theory is an important one. It points out that beyond the content disseminated, the medium itself may reveal critical information about the way it disrupts tradition and reshapes social life. By focusing on the impacts of technologies themselves, we are able to recognize patterns that seem to be prototypical of major change in technological innovation. For instance, Eisenstein (1980) and Havelock (1980) note a profound feeling of despair and a state of confusion that have emerged during previous communication epochs. As many medium theorists explain, this is likely the result of trying to do today’s job with yesterday’s tools and concepts (e.g., McLuhan & Fiore, 1964). We can see similar instances of this in today’s digital landscape. It seems that scholars who fail to realize this, fall one step behind in developing empirical work that will facilitate the (unavoidable) transition period. Therefore, the benefits of this conceptualization is that by understanding the way media, more generally, shapes society, we are able to build a knowledge that transcends time. Nonetheless, because medium theory still places emphasis on phenomenal characteristics of an individual medium, it will be difficult (likely nearly impossible) to produce relevant research that accounts for the changing nature of technology and its subsequent effect on psychological and cultural effects.
