CMN529_ASSN1
UIN: 67774521


My research revolves around the impact of technology on memory and knowledge. This said, the implications that my research often draw toward is the institution of education. In my last response, I briefly mentioned the ways that mediatization theory provide new insights to research using an “effect-paradigm” by focusing on the what the media do to people. For example, my professors often tell students that they may not use computers to take notes, as research suggests that taking notes on a computer leads to worse learning than taking notes by hand. Within this paradigm, media are considered to be an independent variable that affects the dependent variable (i.e., student learning). According to Hjarvard (2013), mediatization differs from this tradition by suggesting the ways in which culture and society are permeated by the media, to the extent that the media may no longer be conceivable as being separate from the institution. This differing perspective might provide valuable insight toward resolving the flaws in metacognition, which concerns people’s cognition (or beliefs) about their cognitions. For instance, most people are inaccurate in measuring their own knowledge, through judgments of learning, because they mistakenly rely on the immediate access to knowledge in order to determine the long-term memory retention and the transfer of such knowledge to different contexts. In this sense, technology clearly present an issue to learners because popular technologies today are often used to quickly and immediately access information before searching internally. Using an effect-paradigm, scholars might suggest avoiding technology in the classrooms. However, mediatization theory offers the possibility to examine the processes of the institution to determine whether there are other ways to resolve the issue. A mediatization might notice that the lecturing habits used by many lecturers relies on quick recall (e.g., lecturer says, “who remembers what the outcome variable in this article is?” or “what was the major concept discussed last week?”). This may be problematic because technology allows the students’ mind to quickly search for the answer. In this sense, technology limited the professor’s goal of having students elaborate on previous concepts. However, if we (the scholar) direct our attention toward examining the institution, rather than the medium itself, we might be able to propose several ways to redirect this problem. For example, a professor could reframe her teaching style toward concept-building and critical thinking (e.g., lecturer says, “how can you apply this concept to your own experiences?” or “what are the limitations of X argument?”). In this situation, students cannot quickly search the query to answer the question posed by the lecturer. Even better, they are able to use technology to enhance their understanding of concepts they do not know (e.g., “What is argument X?”) in order to formulate a response based on human reasoning, which is something that technology cannot do. Ultimately, the more advanced a technology becomes, the more crucial becomes the contribution of the human operator. This is because the human will always be able to operate the processes that the technology cannot satisfy. Integrating issues posed by effect-paradigms and mediatization-paradigms, we may be able to maximize the effectiveness of the technology (by studying effects) and also the human operator (mediatization-paradigms).
