CMN529_ASSN1
UIN: 67709750


Media logic, broadly speaking, focuses on how media operate in society. In general, it seems that the goal of this approach is to shift the predominant paradigm of conceptualization away from perception of media as a form of communication with its own logic, and toward subproperties, or formats, of particular media that influence major institutions, and thereby, shape society. This said, the authors point out that they cannot speak to the analysis of the conditions and processes that yield knowledge, which unfortunately, is central to my area of study. 


The goal of my research is to gain a broader understanding of the processes and contexts that enable and constrain technology variables from influencing judgments of internal knowledge. Although the author suggests that the media logic approach may not translate directly to the “sociology of knowledge”, I think that in some sense, we could translate human memory into its own institution with established laws and practices. Innovative technologies extend the scope of our mind in ways that we hardly notice. For instance, external sources, such as computers and smartphones, often serve as an extended cognitive system, which interact with internal cognitive processes to construct the full range of our cognitive capabilities. Given that capacity of computing technologies has reached a degree of speed and efficiency that many find comparable to (or surpassing) the rate of human thought, computer-based information and communication devices have become a valuable memory partner to human users. In several ways, our mind uses cues that are available to inform our judgments. Technologies that serve as natural extensions of the human mind present new issues, as these technologies are likely to cue heuristics that exist in a variety of new configurations specific to the human-computer partnership. Media logic helps to clarify the major impacts of media on social reality, and proposes a concrete approach to digestible parts. In spite of its positive impacts, such as expanding the capacity of human cognition and improving the efficiency of information searching, the increasingly ubiquitous human-machine partnership may fundamentally alter the ways in which humans perceive themselves. Because people often assess internal knowledge without careful consideration of the information source, people are susceptible to consider all processes that are part of their cognitive scope—external or internal—as indicators of self. This is evidence that media may affect human memory and knowledge in a similar manner to the way media logic proposes that formats of technology influence institutions in a way that is pervasive, yet unobtrusive, to most. Nonetheless, I appreciate that the author carefully considered the boundary conditions of this approach. By leaving the concept of “institution” up for interpretation, readers (like me) may haphazardly apply the approach to something that is outside of its scope of explication. In other words, while a media logic approach makes sense in the context of my research at a superficial level, it devalues the validity and reliability to which they apply to more formal institutions (e.g., politics, religion).
